--- page 1 ---
 
 
The City of 
Edinburgh Council 
Proposed 2024/25 Annual Audit Report 
 
 
 
Prepared for the Members of The City of Edinburgh Council and the Controller of Audit  
September 2025 

--- page 2 ---
The City of Edinburgh Council: Proposed 2024/25 Annual Audit Report | 2 
 
Contents 
 
Key messages 3 
Introduction 4 
Audit scope and responsibilities 5 
Audit of the annual accounts 7 
Wider scope audit 21 
Best Value audit 41 
Appendix 1 47 
Appendix 2 53 
Appendix 3 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accessibility 
You can find out more and read this report using assistive technology on 
our website www.audit.scot/accessibility. 
--- page 3 ---
Key messages | 3 
 
Key messages  
 
Audit of the annual accounts 
1 All audit opinions stated that the annual accounts were free from material 
misstatement. This means we consider the accounts to show a true and fair 
view and follow relevant accounting standards and legislation.  
2 There were a number of significant findings to report. All material audit 
adjustments required to correct the financial statements were processed by 
the council. 
Wider scope audit 
3 The council has broadly effective and appropriate arrangements in place for 
Financial Management; Financial Sustainability; Vision, Leadership and 
Governance; and Use of Resources to Improve Outcomes. 
4 The scale of the council’s budget consultation with its residents has improved, 
but there is scope to make financial reports more accessible to members and 
the public. 
5 The council has high levels of debt which are forecast to reach £3 billion by 
2029/30. It is essential that members fully understand the implications of the 
council’s external borrowing levels on future years budgets. 
Best Value audit  
6 The council has broadly effective and appropriate arrangements in place for 
securing Best Value.  
7 The Management Report on themes prescribed by the Accounts Commission 
reported that the council is not yet demonstrating significant transformational 
change activity to reduce demand for its services and secure longer-term 
financial sustainability.   
8 The council has appropriate arrangements in place for preparing and 
publishing Statutory Performance information, with performance compared to 
prior years and other councils presenting an improvement in many areas. 
--- page 4 ---
Introduction | 4 
 
Introduction 
 
Purpose of the Annual Audit Report 
1.  The purpose of this Annual Audit Report is to report the significant 
matters identified from the 2024/25 audit of the City of Edinburgh Council’s 
annual accounts and the wider scope areas specified in the Code of Audit 
Practice (2021). 
2.  The Annual Audit Report is addressed to City of Edinburgh Council, 
(hereafter referred to as ‘the council’) and the Auditor General for 
Scotland, and will be published on Audit Scotland’s website in due course.  
Appointed auditor and independence 
3.  Michael Oliphant, of Audit Scotland, has been appointed as external 
auditor of The City of Edinburgh Council for the period from 2022/23 until 
2026/27. As reported in the Annual Audit Plan, the appointed auditor and 
the audit team are independent of the council in accordance with relevant 
ethical requirements, including the Financial Reporting Council’s Ethical 
Standard. There have been no developments since the issue of the Annual 
Audit Plan that impact on the continued independence of the engagement 
lead or the rest of the audit team from the council, including no provision of 
non-audit services.  
Acknowledgements 
4.  We would like to thank the council and its staff, particularly those 
involved in preparation of the annual accounts, for their cooperation and 
assistance during the audit.  
--- page 5 ---
Audit scope and responsibilities | 5 
 
Audit scope and responsibilities 
 
Scope of the audit  
5.  Our audit of The City of Edinburgh Council and its group is performed in 
accordance with the Code of Audit Practice, including supplementary 
guidance, International Standards on Auditing (ISA) (UK), and relevant 
legislation. These set out the requirements for the scope of the audit which 
includes:  
• An audit of the financial statements and an opinion on whether they 
give a true and fair view and are free from material misstatement.  
• An opinion on statutory other information published with the 
financial statements in the annual accounts, namely the 
Performance Report and Governance Statement. 
• An opinion on the audited part of the Remuneration and Staff 
Report.  
• Conclusions on the council’s arrangements in relation to the wider 
scope areas: Financial Management; Financial Sustainability; 
Vision, Leadership and Governance; and Use of Resources to 
Improve Outcomes.  
• Reporting on the council’s arrangements for securing Best Value. 
• providing assurance on the Housing Benefit Subsidy Claim, Non-
Domestic Rates Return and the Whole of Government Accounts 
(WGA) return  
Responsibilities and reporting 
6.  The Code of Audit Practice sets out the respective responsibilities of the 
council and the auditor. A summary of the key responsibilities is outlined 
below.  
Auditor’s responsibilities 
7.  The responsibilities of auditors in the public sector are established in 
the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973. These include providing an 
independent opinion on the financial statements and other information 
reported within the annual accounts, and concluding on the council’s 
arrangements in place for the wider scope areas and Best Value. 
8.  The matters reported in the Annual Audit Report are only those that 
have been identified by the audit team during normal audit work and may 
--- page 6 ---
Audit scope and responsibilities | 6 
 
not be all that exist. Communicating these does not absolve the council 
from its responsibilities outlined below.  
9.  The Annual Audit Report includes an agreed action plan at Appendix 1 
setting out specific recommendations to address matters identified and 
includes details of the responsible officer and dates for implementation. 
Responsibilities of the City of Edinburgh Council 
10.  The council has primary responsibility for ensuring proper financial 
stewardship of public funds, compliance with relevant legislation and 
establishing effective arrangements for governance, propriety, and 
regularity that enables it to successfully deliver its objectives. The features 
of proper financial stewardship include:  
• Establishing arrangements to ensure the proper conduct of 
its affairs.  
• Preparation of an annual accounts, comprising financial statements 
for the council and its group that gives a true and fair view and other 
specified information.  
• Establishing arrangements for the prevention and detection of 
fraud, error and irregularities, and bribery and corruption.  
• Implementing arrangements to ensure its financial position is 
soundly based.  
• Making arrangements to secure Best Value.  
• Establishing an internal audit function. 
National performance audit reporting 
11.  The Auditor General for Scotland and the Accounts Commission 
regularly publish national and performance audit reports. These cover a 
range of matters, many of which may be of interest to the council. Details 
of national and performance audit reports published over the last year can 
be seen in Appendix 3. 
--- page 7 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 7 
 
Audit of the annual accounts 
 
Main judgements 
All audit opinions stated that the annual accounts were free from 
material misstatement. This means we consider the accounts to show a 
true and fair view and follow relevant accounting standards and 
legislation. 
 
There were no significant findings or key audit matters to report. All 
material audit adjustments required to correct the financial statements 
were processed by the council. 
Audit opinions on the annual accounts 
12.  The council and its group’s annual accounts were approved by 
Finance & Resources Committee on 18 September 2025. The 
Independent Auditor’s Report is included in the council’s annual accounts, 
and this reports that, in the appointed auditor’s opinion, these were free 
from material misstatement.  
Audit timetable  
13.  The unaudited annual accounts and all working papers were received 
on 26 June 2025 in accordance with the agreed audit timetable. 
Audit Fee 
14.  The audit fee for the 2024/25 audit was reported in the Annual Audit 
Plan and was set at £736,760. We determine our audit fee based on the 
timely receipt of responses to our requests for audit evidence. We 
experienced a significant delay during 2024/25 in relation to receiving 
evidence for our best value report on transformation and in receiving 
assurances in our assessment of the council's payroll system and controls. 
As a result, we have increased our audit fee by £20,783. Our final audit 
fee is £757,543. 
Materiality 
15.  The concept of materiality is applied by auditors in planning and 
performing an audit, and in evaluating the effect of any uncorrected 
misstatements on the financial statements or other information reported in 
the annual accounts. 
--- page 8 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 8 
 
16.  Broadly, the concept of materiality is to determine whether 
misstatements identified during the audit could reasonably be expected to 
influence the decisions of users of the annual accounts. Auditors set a 
monetary threshold when determining materiality, although some issues 
may be considered material by their nature. Therefore, materiality is 
ultimately a matter of the auditor’s professional judgement. 
17.  Materiality levels for the audit of the council and its group were 
determined at the risk assessment phase of the audit and were reported in 
the Annual Audit Plan, which also reported the judgements made in 
determining materiality levels. These were reassessed on receipt of the 
unaudited annual accounts. Materiality levels were updated, and these 
can be seen in Exhibit 1. 
Exhibit 1 
2024/25 Materiality levels for the council and its group 
 
Materiality Value 
Materiality – set at 2% of gross expenditure £55 million 
Performance materiality – set at 65% of materiality. 
As outlined in the Annual Audit Plan, this acts as a 
trigger point. If the aggregate of misstatements 
identified during the audit exceeds performance 
materiality, this could indicate further audit procedures 
are required.  
£36 million 
Reporting threshold   £0.5 million 
Source: Audit Scotland 
Significant findings and key audit matters  
18.  ISA (UK) 260 requires auditors to communicate significant findings 
from the audit to those charged with governance. The Code of Audit 
Practice also requires public sector auditors to communicate key audit 
matters. These are the matters that, in the auditor’s professional 
judgement, are of most significance to the audit of the financial statements 
and require most attention when performing the audit.  
19.  In determining key audit matters, auditors consider: 
• Areas of higher or significant risk of material misstatement.  
• Areas where significant judgement is required, including accounting 
estimates that are subject to a high degree of estimation 
uncertainty.  
--- page 9 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 9 
 
• Significant events or transactions that occurred during the year. 
20.  The significant findings and key audit matters to report are outlined in 
Exhibit 2.  
Exhibit 2  
Significant findings and key audit matters 
 
Significant findings and key audit matters Outcome 
1. Non-current assets valuation 
Our audit of the council’s disclosures around 
non-current assets identified the following: 
• Heritage assets: The council reported 
heritage assets valued at £53.587 million. 
However, this figure included an overall 
total for collections held in museums and 
galleries which was not itemised, and so 
we could not verify this amount. 
Additionally, it was estimated that some 
items were owned by the charitable trusts 
administered by the council, rather than by 
the council itself. 
• Asset categorisation: Assets with a net 
book value of approximately £3 million 
were incorrectly classified and should have 
been reported under ‘Other Land and 
Buildings’. 
• Capital commitments: The total value of 
capital commitments was overstated by 
£50 million.  
The revised set of accounts was adjusted to 
correct these errors. The value of the 
council’s group heritage assets was amended 
to £64.739 million, based, in part, on recent 
insurance valuations. 
 
--- page 10 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 10 
 
Significant findings and key audit matters Outcome 
2. Valuation of IFRS16 ‘right of use’ assets 
The council has a large number of lease 
arrangements and uses a third-party provider 
to supply information to meet IFRS 16 Leases 
disclosure requirements. These are disclosed 
in the accounts as ‘right of use’ assets, 
increasing the value of the council’s assets 
on the balance sheet.  
The finance team identified a number of 
inconsistencies in the figures supplied, and 
raised several queries on the draft figures 
provided by the external provider. Due to the 
constraints of the accounts production 
timetable, these were included in the initial 
accounts presented to audit. Further figures 
were provided and the accounts were 
updated to reflect these.  
 
Our audit testing confirmed the revised 
figures used by the council.  
The council recorded a late adjustment of 
£2.476 million and an overall in-year 
movement of £5.061 million for the net book 
value of its ‘right-of-use’ assets.  
3. Public Private Partnerships (PPP) - 
inclusion of contingent rent 
The council’s calculations for its longer-term 
PPP liability included an estimated uplift on 
rent expenditure derived from the underlying 
accounting models. Accounting standards are 
clear that liabilities should not include 
estimated future indexation-linked increases.  
The current and long-term liability for 2024/25 
and the prior year were recalculated to 
remove this assumption. The opening 
balance for the liability was restated and 
reduced by £26 million. The adjustment for 
2024/25 was an increase of £1 million to the 
PPP liability. 
--- page 11 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 11 
 
Significant findings and key audit matters Outcome 
4. Common Good community assets 
The Common Good account is separate to 
the council’s financial statements and 
represents those properties acquired by the 
local authority which have been passed down 
through time from former burghs.  
The Common Good balance sheet disclosed 
£20.568 million of long-term debtors, which 
represented a significant group of assets of 
local and national importance, including the 
City Chambers, Princes St Gardens, the 
Meadows and Calton Hill, among others. With 
the introduction of IFRS 16, these assets are 
no longer deemed to be leased by the council 
(debtor balances) and should be disclosed as 
community assets. Accounting standards also 
give guidance that these should be valued at 
historic cost, however due to the nature of 
these assets such information is not 
available. 
The Common Good account in the final 
audited statements was amended to disclose 
£4.325 million of community assets at 
historical cost, in line with accounting 
standards. A value of £1000 has been 
applied to each asset as a proxy for historic 
cost, and the opening balance sheet position 
has been restated to reflect this change. 
  
5. Payments to providers of social care 
Swift is a social care case management 
system which the council has agreed to 
replace as an ‘end of life’ system, expected to 
be completed in early 2026. In response to 
our findings from 2023/24, we undertook 
testing on a sample of payments. Our testing 
focused on payments to providers of care 
homes and at-home carers, to verify the 
underlying basis for the payment. 
Again, we found several cases where there 
was no agreed payment plan or contract to 
confirm the rate paid was correct. In these 
cases, there may be potential under or 
overpayments to suppliers, which the council 
is investigating. 
We concluded that, for all items we 
examined, there existed a valid underlying 
basis for the transaction and therefore that 
the accounts are not materially misstated. 
Following our audit findings reported in 
September 2024, in December 2024, the 
control was tightened to manually review 
every invoice which did not match exactly the 
amount expected in Swift. This resulted in a 
backlog of payments. 
The council established a temporary, multi-
disciplinary team to investigate and address 
differences between Swift (the council’s 
records system) and the amounts invoiced by 
care providers. By April 2025, approximately 
£250,000 in overpayments had been 
identified and were in the process of being 
recovered from providers. 
Due to the needs-based nature of the service, 
changes to individual care arrangements 
often take place, making it essential for the 
council to have robust processes and controls 
to maintain a clear audit trail. .  
Paragraph 52.  
 
--- page 12 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 12 
 
Significant findings and key audit matters Outcome 
6. Group accounting 
The authority’s accounts also include its 
share in other organisations which it has an 
element of control, for example Edinburgh 
Living and Transport for Edinburgh. The 
Common Good account was previously  
consolidated into the City of Edinburgh Group 
accounts on an associate basis as it was 
judged not to have significant control. As the 
council administers the Common Good, we 
concluded that it should be included in the 
consolidation on a subsidiary basis. 
In addition, our work identified that the 
council’s consolidated group accounts had 
not included Edinburgh Living’s purchase of 
27 properties at a purchase price of £6.5 
million, as this was a post balance sheet 
event in Edinburgh Living’s accounts and 
identified as part of our audit of the group 
accounts.  
The group accounts were adjusted to:  
• Consolidate the Common Good account 
into the group. 
• Include an additional £6.5 million of non-
current assets, as the purchase of 
properties was before the council group 
year end of 31 March 2025 
7. Implementation of a new HR and payroll 
system 
The council implemented a new Oracle 
Fusion HR and Payroll System in October 
2024. As with any change of such a 
significant system, there were potential risks 
in the accurate processing and transfer of 
data, which could result in incorrect staff 
costs reported in the council's accounts. 
We considered the governance arrangements 
for the new system implementation project, 
reviewed documentation of the data transfer 
and inspected reconciliations between the 
new payroll system and general ledger. 
The delivery of the project was split into two 
phases. Both phases were delivered late as 
compared to original timescales. Phase 1 
was initially scheduled to complete by end of 
March 2024 and completed in October 2024. 
Phase 2 was initially scheduled to complete 
by October 2024 and after revisions to the 
project timescales was implemented in March 
2025.  
We concluded that the council’s approach to 
the data transfer exercise was appropriate. 
The council identified issues with how the 
data was feeding from the new payroll system 
into the general ledger. This required 
significant input from payroll and finance staff 
to resolve. Our audit testing confirmed that 
the ledger materially agrees with the payroll 
system and therefore staff costs reported in 
council's accounts are not misstated. 
--- page 13 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 13 
 
Significant findings and key audit matters Outcome 
8. Errors in classification of balances 
Our audit identified the following errors as a 
result of our testing of transactions and 
balances: 
• There were compensating payables and 
receivables balances relating to non-
domestic rates which had not been 
adjusted. A correction was required to net 
off payables and receivables by £27.9 
million.  
• We also identified a negative prepayment 
within the receivables balance of £2.065 
million, having the effect of reducing the 
value of receivables owed to the council. 
This sum was based on information 
provided by a third-party provider, but as 
further evidence was not available, we 
concluded this was an error.  
Management processed all necessary 
adjustments to correct the NDR payables and 
receivables. 
Adjustments were made to prepayments, but 
management chose not to adjust the queried 
balance in total, leaving a remainder of 
£1.780 million. This falls below our materiality 
threshold and is therefore classed as an 
unadjusted error.  
 
Source: Audit Scotland 
Qualitative aspects of accounting practices  
21.  ISA (UK) 260 also requires auditors to communicate their view about 
qualitative aspects of the council’s accounting practices, including 
accounting policies, accounting estimates, and disclosures in the financial 
statements. 
Accounting policies  
22.  The appropriateness of accounting policies adopted by the council 
was assessed as part of the audit. These were considered to be 
appropriate to the circumstances of the council, and there were no 
significant departures from the accounting policies set out in the Code of 
Practice on Local Authority Accounting in the United Kingdom (the Code).  
Accounting estimates  
23.  Accounting estimates are used in number of areas in the council’s 
financial statements, including the valuation of land and buildings assets 
and the valuation of the pension liability. Audit work considered the 
process management of the council has in place around making 
accounting estimates, including the assumptions and data used in making 
the estimates, and the use of any management experts. Audit work 
concluded:   
--- page 14 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 14 
 
• There were no issues with the selection or application of methods, 
assumptions, and data used to make the accounting estimates, and 
these were considered to be reasonable.  
• There was no evidence of management bias in making the 
accounting estimates. 
Group audit  
24.  The council is part of a group and prepares group financial 
statements. The group is made up of ten components, including the 
council which is the parent of the group. As outlined in the Annual Audit 
Plan, audit work was required on components material to the CEC group 
for the purposes of the group audit, and this work was performed by a 
combination of the audit team and the components’ audit teams. As group 
auditor we placed reliance on the work of component auditors and where 
the component was material we reviewed their risk assessment and work 
to address significant risks identified. The audit work performed on the 
group’s material components is summarised in Exhibit 3. 
Exhibit 3 
Summary of audit work on the group’s components 
 
Group 
component  Auditor and audit work required Summary of audit work performed  
Transport for 
Edinburgh 
Azets 
Work to address the significant risk 
over fraud in revenue recognition 
and also the significant risk over the 
valuation of non-current assets, 
including right of use assets 
The specific audit procedures required 
were performed by the component 
auditor and these were evaluated and 
reviewed by the group audit team. No 
significant issues were identified. No 
issues were identified in the audit 
procedures performed by the 
component auditor.  
Edinburgh 
Living MMR 
Azets  
Work involved in estimating updated 
valuations for investment property 
as at 31 March 2025 
 
 
Additional work by the component 
auditor confirmed that the valuation of 
investment property had not been 
significantly affected between 
December 2024 and March 2025. 
Source: Audit Scotland 
--- page 15 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 15 
 
Other matters to report  
25.  Auditing standards require auditors to report a number of other matters 
if they are identified or encountered during an audit. Other matters not 
disclosed in Exhibit 2 include the following:  
• The accounts presented to audit were adjusted from those 
presented to the council to include data from more recently-
available actuarial reports relating to IAS 19 pensions disclosures.  
• The cash and cash equivalents balance was adjusted to properly 
reflect unprocessed creditor payments and banking off-setting 
arrangements.  
• We have identified areas where financial controls could be 
strengthened. These relate to payments to social care providers 
and payroll validation procedures, refer Paragraph 52.   
Significant matters discussed with management 
26.  All significant matters identified during the audit and discussed with 
officers have been reported in the Annual Audit Report.  
Audit adjustments 
27.  Audit adjustments were required to the financial statements to correct 
misstatements that were identified from the audit. Details of all audit 
adjustments greater than the reporting threshold of £0.5 million are 
outlined in Exhibit 4, (page 18) 
Exhibit 4 
Significant audit adjustments  
Details 
Financial 
statements lines 
impacted 
Comprehensive Income 
and Expenditure 
Statement (CIES) Balance Sheet 
Audit adjustments to financial 
statements Dr Cr Dr Cr 
 £000 £000 £000 £000 
1. Correction to reflect unprocessed 
creditor payments and offsetting 
arrangements. 
   
 
 
 Cash and cash 
equivalents    35,028  
 Trade Payables     (35,028) 
--- page 16 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 16 
 
Details 
Financial 
statements lines 
impacted 
Comprehensive Income 
and Expenditure 
Statement (CIES) Balance Sheet 
2. Correction required relating to NDR 
debtors and creditors.     
 Receivables   27,941  
 Payables    27,941 
3. Public Private Partnerships (PPP) 
restatement to remove an estimated 
uplift to contingent rent from the liability.  
    
 Finance leases 
(creditors)    26,026  
 Right of use 
assets     (26,026) 
4. Post balance sheet event for 
Edinburgh Living (Exhibit 2, point 6).     
 Investment 
Property   6,525  
 Long term 
liabilities (removed 
on consolidation) 
   (6,525) 
5. Classification corrections for non-
current assets      
 Other land and 
buildings   3,095  
 Assets under 
construction    (2,412) 
 Dwellings    (683) 
6. Recognising the Common Good 
Fund as a subsidiary and not an 
associate within the group 
    
 Surplus for the 
year  (269)   
 Assets   9,478  
 Liabilities    (9,209) 
--- page 17 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 17 
 
Details 
Financial 
statements lines 
impacted 
Comprehensive Income 
and Expenditure 
Statement (CIES) Balance Sheet 
7. Restating Common Good long term 
debtors as non-current assets      
 Community assets  1,304   
 Other land and buildings  752   
 Receivables   (20,658) 
 Deferred income   (2,909) 
 Revaluation reserve  21,511  
Net impact on financial statements  (269) 105,645 (105,376) 
     
Source: Audit Scotland 
28.  In addition to the corrected misstatements outlined in Exhibit 2, there 
were other misstatements identified greater than the reporting threshold. 
The value, nature, and circumstances of the uncorrected misstatements 
were considered, individually and in aggregate, by the audit team, and it 
was concluded these were not material to the financial statements. As a 
result, these did not have any impact on the audit opinions given in the 
Independent Auditor’s Report. 
29.  It is the auditor’s responsibility to request that all misstatements 
greater than the reporting threshold are corrected, even if they are not 
material. Management has processed all audit adjustments to correct 
these misstatements, with the exception of a £1.780 million balance, 
detailed within item 8 in Exhibit 2 which cannot be agreed to sufficient 
evidence. This uncorrected error does not have any impact on the audit 
opinions given in the Independent Auditor’s Report. 
Significant risks of material misstatement identified in the Annual 
Audit Plan 
30.  Audit work has been performed in response to the significant risks of 
material misstatement identified in the Annual Audit Plan. The outcome of 
audit work performed is summarised in Exhibit 5.   
--- page 18 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 18 
 
Exhibit 5 
Significant risks of material misstatement to the financial statements 
 
Risk of material 
misstatement Planned audit response Outcome of audit work 
Fraud caused by 
management override of 
controls  
Management is in a unique 
position to perpetrate fraud 
because of management’s 
ability to override controls 
that otherwise appear to be 
operating effectively. 
The audit team will: 
• Evaluate the design and 
implementation of controls 
over journal entry 
processing. 
• Make inquiries of 
individuals involved in the 
financial reporting process 
about inappropriate or 
unusual activity relating to 
the processing of journal 
entries. 
• Test journals entries, 
focusing on those that are 
assessed as higher risk, 
such as those affecting 
revenue and expenditure 
recognition around the 
year-end.  
• Evaluate significant 
transactions outside the 
normal course of business. 
• Assess the adequacy of 
controls in place for 
identifying and disclosing 
related party relationships 
and transactions in the 
financial statements.  
• Assess changes to the 
methods and underlying 
assumptions used to 
prepare accounting 
estimates and assess 
these for evidence of 
management bias. 
Audit work performed found: 
• The design and 
implementation of controls 
over journal processing 
were appropriate.  
• No inappropriate or 
unusual activity relating to 
the processing of journal 
entries was identified from 
discussions with 
individuals involved in 
financial reporting.  
• No significant issues were 
identified from testing of 
journal entries.  
• No significant issues were 
identified from transactions 
outside the normal course 
of business.  
• The controls in place for 
identifying and disclosing 
related party relationships 
and transactions were 
adequate.  
• No significant issues were 
identified with changes to 
methods and underlying 
assumptions used to 
prepare accounting 
estimates and there was 
no evidence of 
management bias.  
Conclusion: no evidence of 
fraud caused by 
management override of 
controls.  
--- page 19 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 19 
 
Risk of material 
misstatement Planned audit response Outcome of audit work 
Valuation of property, plant 
and equipment  
The City of Edinburgh 
Council disclosed more than 
£5.7 billion of property, plant, 
and equipment (PPE) at 31 
March 2024, of which £4.4 
billion was land and buildings.  
There is a significant degree 
of subjectivity in these 
valuations which are based 
on specialist assumptions, 
and changes in the 
assumptions can result in 
material changes to 
valuations and therefore 
presenting a risk of 
misstatement.  
The audit team will:  
• Evaluate the design and 
implementation of controls 
over the valuation process.  
• Review the information 
provided to the valuer and 
assess this for 
completeness and 
accuracy.  
• Evaluate the competence, 
capabilities, and objectivity 
of the valuer.  
• Obtain an understanding 
of management’s 
involvement in the 
valuation process to 
assess if appropriate 
oversight has occurred.  
• Review the 
appropriateness of the key 
data and assumptions 
used in the 2024/25 
valuation process, and 
challenge these where 
required.  
• Review management’s 
assessment that the value 
in the balance sheet of 
assets not subject to a 
valuation process in 
2024/25 is not materially 
different to current value at 
the year-end, and 
challenge this where 
required.  
•  
Our work in this area is 
summarised in Exhibit 2. 
Conclusion: the valuation of 
PPE is not materially 
misstated in the adjusted 
annual accounts.  
--- page 20 ---
Audit of the annual accounts | 20 
 
Risk of material 
misstatement Planned audit response Outcome of audit work 
Risk of fraud over 
expenditure recognition  
In line with Practice Note 10: 
Audit of financial statements 
and regularity of public sector 
bodies in the United 
Kingdom, most public bodies 
are net expenditure bodies 
and therefore the risk of fraud 
is more likely to occur in 
expenditure.  
We have evaluated the 
council’s significant 
expenditure streams. Some 
significant expenditure areas, 
including staff costs, interest 
payments and depreciation, 
amortisation and impairment, 
are not considered areas of 
risk. However, due to the 
extent and complexity of the 
council’s other service 
expenses, we identified there 
is a risk that expenditure may 
be misstated.  
The audit team will: 
• Perform detailed testing of 
expenditure transactions, 
including cut-off testing, 
focussing on the areas of 
greatest risk to assess 
completeness and 
accuracy of expenditure.  
• Monitor the budgetary 
process and reporting.  
• Carry out substantive 
testing of accruals and 
prepayments.  
We carried out targeted 
testing of higher-risk areas, 
including substantive testing 
of accruals and prepayments. 
We did not identify evidence 
of fraudulent expenditure.   
Conclusion: The accounts 
are not materially misstated 
in respect of fraudulent 
expenditure. 
Source: Audit Scotland 
Prior year recommendations  
31.  The council has made good progress in implementing the agreed prior 
year audit recommendations. For actions not yet implemented, revised 
responses and timescales have been agreed with the council and are 
outlined in Appendix 1. 
 
 
--- page 21 ---
Wider scope audit | 21 
 
Wider scope audit  
 
Conclusion 
The council has broadly effective and appropriate arrangements in place 
for Financial Management; Financial Sustainability, Vision, Leadership 
and Governance; and Use of Resources to Improve Outcomes.  
Audit approach to wider scope 
Wider scope 
32.  As reported in the Annual Audit Plan, the wider scope audit areas are:  
• Financial Management. 
• Financial Sustainability. 
• Vision, Leadership and Governance. 
• Use of Resources to Improve Outcomes.  
33.  Audit work is performed on these four areas and a conclusion on the 
effectiveness and appropriateness of arrangements the council has in 
place for each of these is reported in this chapter.  
Significant wider scope risk 
34.  Audit work has been performed in response to the one significant 
wider scope risk identified in the Annual Audit Plan, relating to financial 
sustainability. The outcome of audit work performed is summarised below 
in Exhibit 6 (page 22).  
--- page 22 ---
Wider scope audit | 22 
 
Exhibit 6 
Significant wider scope risk 
 
Significant risk Planned audit response Outcome of audit work 
Financial sustainability  
The council’s budget for 
2024/25 was approved with 
financial balance dependent 
upon delivery of savings and 
additional income totalling 
£28.5 million. In January 
2025, the council reported 
that, despite further 
underlying pressures of £32.6 
million, it was on track to 
delivering 90% of planned 
savings. The council is now 
forecasting a balanced year-
end position, with further 
savings in corporate budgets 
identified to offset the 
additional cost pressures 
which had arisen throughout 
the year.  
Financial sustainability 
remains a risk for the council, 
with its own financial plan 
forecasting a £94.2 million 
gap by 2029/30. Challenges 
include pressures for frontline 
services, delivery of almost 
£48 million of approved 
savings within the Edinburgh 
Integration Joint Board and 
proposals for a significant 
increase in the level of capital 
borrowing, which is forecast 
to increase to £2.879 billion 
by March 2029.  
The audit team will:  
Monitor the financial position 
throughout the year and 
provide an update in our 
2024/25 Annual Audit Report.  
Consider the council’s 
progress in developing a 
longer-term financial plan.  
 
The council has reported in 
its annual accounts that it 
achieved an overall 
underspend of £2.719 million, 
delivering 84% of its savings 
measures. There is a medium 
term financial plan in place 
which now forecasts a budget 
gap of £94.2 million by 2030. 
Source: Audit Scotland 
  
--- page 23 ---
Wider scope audit | 23 
 
Conclusions on wider scope audit 
Financial Management  
35.  The audit work performed on the arrangements the council has in 
place for securing sound financial management found that these were 
largely effective and appropriate, with areas for improvement highlighted 
throughout this report. This judgement is evidenced by the council:  
• having a system of internal control in place, with some areas 
identified where key controls could be strengthened.  
• having policies and procedures, for example, financial regulations 
and scheme of delegation, in place 
• having policies in place for preventing and detecting fraud and other 
irregularities, and participation in fraud prevention and detection 
activities such as the National Fraud Initiative (NFI).  
• having suitably qualified and experienced staff leading the finance 
function.  
• having arrangements in place for the scrutiny of arrangements that 
support sound financial management.   
The council achieved an underspend of £2.719 million in 2024/25  
36.  The council approved its revenue budget for 2024/25 in February 
2024, with total planned expenditure of £1,361 million (2023/24: £1,282 
million). The council did not increase council tax, utilising the Scottish 
Government's offer of £16.1 million to compensate for the income which 
would have been raised through a rise to residential taxpayers. 
37.  The initial budget identified required savings and additional income 
totalling £28.5 million, representing around two per cent of its total revenue 
budget. In setting the 2024/25 budget, the council recognised there are 
widespread financial pressures creating significant risks to the delivery of 
a balanced budget. Key pressures included: 
• Delivery of almost £47.8 million of savings across Edinburgh IJB, 
with the joint board reporting that £42.6 million was achieved by 
year-end. The council agreed to provide additional funding of £12.1 
million to the IJB during 2024/25, alongside a £2.4m further 
contribution from NHS Lothian, as a budget shortfall deteriorated, 
and funding for the IJB has been a source of tension between the 
two bodies. While financial pressures remain significant, we have 
observed encouraging signs of improved communication and 
collaboration between the council, the IJB and NHS Lothian. 
• Demand-led pressures in services but particularly homelessness, 
with an associated full-year pressure of £7.5 million.  
--- page 24 ---
Wider scope audit | 24 
 
• Pay awards, with an average of 3% included in the approved 
budget. 
38.  The council has reported in its annual accounts that it achieved an 
overall underspend of £2.719 million, made possible by a further 
application of reserves (£12.889 million) and savings/additional income in 
corporate budgets (£8.766 million). This is set against unbudgeted 
overspends of £18.936 million. The underspend has been earmarked for 
reinstatement of the council’s Innovation Fund.  
The council delivered 84% of its planned savings measures 
39.  The council also reports that 84% of approved savings were delivered 
during 2024/25 (£23.9 million of the planned £28.5 million). Some of the savings 
and increased income plans included: 
• Homelessness initiatives including a reduction in void properties with an 
estimated 191 households coming out of temporary accommodation - 
£3.45 million 
• Increased income from parking and bus camera lane enforcement - £3 
million  
• Non-domestic rates relief for empty properties – £7 million 
• Rationalisation of the council’s property portfolio – £1 million. 
40.  The council has a good track record of achieving planned savings. In 
2023/24, it achieved £22.437 million (84% of its planned total), and 98% of its 
measures in 2022/23. In addition to its savings plans, the council has benefitted 
from time-limited, significant expenditure reductions through exercising 
flexibilities in how it accounts for service-concessions, and reductions to the 
amount it is required to pay to the pension fund as an employer contribution. 
The council recognises that the scale of the budget gap in future years will 
mean more difficult savings and income generation decisions will need to be 
made. 
The scale of budget consultation has improved 
41.  The Accounts Commission has, for many years, highlighted the 
importance of councils consulting communities as part of their budget 
setting processes, including seeking the views of local citizens on priority 
areas for investment or disinvestment. In 2024/25, 24 of Scotland’s 32 
local authorities informed or consulted residents about the financial 
pressures it faces. Of those, 20 consulted all residents and four consulted 
only specific groups within their communities.  
42.  In 2024/25, the council did not directly consult its residents prior to the 
budget being approved. A consultation was launched in April 2024 to 
inform decision-making for the 2025/26 and future budgets. The 
consultation sought to communicate its overall budget position over 
multiple years and strategic priorities to residents, emphasising the need 
to create efficiencies and in some cases reduce services provided. 
--- page 25 ---
Wider scope audit | 25 
 
Residents were asked for their views on how the council can save money, 
which services could be reduced and where the council has done well. 
Contributions were sought at drop-in sessions and an online consultation 
hub, with a series of focus groups planned to explore subjects raised by 
residents. 
43.  The council’s recent consultation on the 2025/26 budget took place in two 
phases: 
• From April to June 2024 Phase One of the budget engagement 
exercise with Edinburgh residents was conducted with the results of this 
exercise reported to the Finance and Resources Committee (F&RC) on 
19 September 2024.  
• The same questions were repeated in a staff engagement exercise run 
in October 2024, the results of which were reported on 4 February 2025 
(F&RC) along with a summary of the budget consultation undertaken 
with Edinburgh residents between 20 November 2024 and 14 January 
2025, on officer proposals to balance the budget for financial year 
2025/26. 
44.  These results were communicated to members in February 2025 prior 
to finalising the 2025/26 budget. The council reported that 3,260 residents 
took part in the budget consultation. In June 2025, the council undertook 
research to compare how it carried out budget consultations against other 
local authorities in Scotland, the UK and internationally. It concluded that 
Edinburgh exceeded standards in both methodology and timeframes, but 
recognised areas to improve, such as in attracting views from younger 
people.  
45.  The council adopts a considered and appropriate approach to budget 
consultations. However, the extent to which the consultation influenced the 
final budget decisions made by members is less evident. The majority of 
the budget is ‘rolled-forward’ as-is based on previous years’ spend, and 
then further shaped by political groups’ priorities. As a consequence, this 
leaves little further room for residents’ input. 
46.  While we did not undertake a full assessment of the consultation’s 
impact or effectiveness, the council should be able to evidence how 
residents’ views shaped budget outcomes. This would demonstrate that 
the council gives power to residents to shape its spending plans, and may 
help boost participation in future consultations. 
Financial reports should be improved to support good scrutiny  
47.  Our briefing on local government budgets 2025/26 identified that budget 
papers and financial monitoring reports provided to elected members should 
include clear and understandable headline figures that state the impact of 
specific budget decisions on the overall financial position of the council. It 
identified that the way in which budget papers at some local authorities were 
presented means that elected members and communities cannot easily 
--- page 26 ---
Wider scope audit | 26 
 
determine the impact of budget decisions nor the overall financial position of the 
council, highlighting a need to improve accessibility and transparency. 
48.  Financial reports provided to members do not support good scrutiny as they 
are often very technical in detail and are not tailored sufficiently to reflect that 
not all members have a financial background. While members may receive a 
degree of comfort from detailed reports, it is important that the council makes its 
financial reports more accessible to better support members in their 
understanding and scrutiny of council’s finances. This is particularly important 
when members are expected and required to make difficult decisions that will 
impact on the services delivered by the council both now and in the future.  
49.  For example:  
• The council's revenue budget monitoring report does not include 
details of spending to date, with the focus being on year-end 
forecasts. This does not allow scrutiny of spending levels during the 
course of the year, including monitoring of variances between 
budget and outturn across each area of council activity and the 
subsequent impact on year-end forecasts. 
• The council's capital budget monitoring report does not include 
details of individual project performance against project budgets or 
timescales. This limits scrutiny on how well individual projects are 
performing against cost and time targets and the impact on the 
overall capital programme. For example, an overspending project 
may need targeted action to limit the cost overrun or where a 
project faces delays, decisions can be taken about the impact on 
the overall capital programme.  
• The council's Treasury Management Strategy does not clearly 
outline the issues, risks and options for the council. It is a very 
detailed, technical document but more should be done to draw out 
the key issues for members to consider, including the benefits and 
risks of options and any underlying assumptions. This is particularly 
important due to the significant sums involved and the technical 
nature of treasury management. Members should be able to easily 
determine from officer reports if there is scope to increase 
borrowing, or if debt levels are a cause for concern. The current 
strategy highlights that "The Council continues to have a substantial 
borrowing requirement over the coming years leaving a significant 
financing risk" but there is no further commentary to explain what 
the council's options are to reduce or manage this risk, or the 
implications for the council should the risk crystallise. 
• The annual budget papers could be made more accessible to 
members by summarising the key components of the budget. 
Currently, the information provided is predominantly focused on 
high-level policies in each area with detailed appendices and 
supporting papers. While all relevant information is available, it 
should be summarised to better support members’ consideration 
--- page 27 ---
Wider scope audit | 27 
 
and scrutiny. For example, the budget information presented could 
summarise proposed revenue and capital budgets; council tax 
levels; funding gaps and savings required; funding sources; 
utilisation of reserves; and outcomes from equality impact 
assessments and community engagement processes, and how they 
impacted budget development.  
 
Recommendation 1 
Clarity of reporting to elected members and the public 
 
Budget papers, financial monitoring and treasury management reports 
should present key information in a way that is accessible and 
understandable to elected members and the public. The council should 
improve reporting to present key financial information such as budget 
reports, savings measures and borrowing in an understandable and 
consistent way, including summary information, to better inform 
decision-making. 
Internal audit provided a reasonable level of assurance over the 
council’s overall control environment 
50.  The council’s internal audit service provides members and 
management with independent assurance on risk management, internal 
control and corporate governance processes as well as providing a 
deterrent effect to potential fraud.  
51.  Internal Audit’s annual report, presented to the September 2025 
Governance, Risk and Best Value Committee, provided an opinion with a 
“reasonable” level of overall assurance. It concluded that there is a 
generally an overall sound system of governance, risk management and 
control in place.  
There are areas where financial controls could be strengthened  
52.  From our high-level review of the design and implementation of 
systems of internal control (including those relating to IT) and the testing of 
the operating effectiveness of specific controls, we have identified areas 
where key controls could be strengthened as below:  
Payments to social care providers (carried forward from 2023/24): 
We reported in Part 1 the results of our audit testing on the 
payments which originate from Swift. We recommend the council 
reviews the overall control environment around social care 
transactions, from initiation to payment stages. This could include, 
but not be limited to:  
--- page 28 ---
Wider scope audit | 28 
 
• Appropriate agreed documentation/contracts between providers 
and the council for each individual package of care, clearly setting 
out rates, services, invoicing arrangements and any variations for 
each individual receiving care.  
• Regular reviews of care arrangements and budgetary checks to 
confirm that supplier invoices are agreed to the terms of the 
contract including values 
• Secondary quality checks/spot checks to ensure care was delivered 
in line with contracts, for example through care logs and attendance 
records and that these match invoiced amounts 
• Appropriate workflows and authorisation levels 
• Exception reporting for overpayments, duplicate payments or 
unusual variation in payments 
• Ensuring an appropriate audit trail for transactions. 
• The council should also consider if there are gaps in training, and 
undertake risk-based audits of larger or higher-risk providers. 
Payroll Validation (carried forward from 2023/24): Employee 
validation checks to confirm the existence of employees provides 
assurance on the completeness and accuracy of payroll records and is 
an important control within any payroll system. In the prior year this 
was done indirectly by the council through regular budget monitoring. 
Our payroll work identified that during 2024/25 no budget monitoring at 
a required level of detail to identify individual staff members was 
prepared. For part of the year, this was due to the new payroll system 
limitations. We recommend the council ensures that budget holders 
confirm directly, on an annual basis, that the payroll establishment 
listing for their business area was accurate and remained up to date.  
 
Recommendation 2 
Budget monitoring of payroll costs 
 
The council should ensure all budget holders directly validate their 
establishment list on a regular basis. This would provide assurance that 
only genuine, active employees are paid and ensure accurate financial 
reporting. 
 
  
--- page 29 ---
Wider scope audit | 29 
 
Financial Sustainability  
53.  The audit work performed on the arrangements the council has in 
place for securing financial sustainability found that these were effective 
and appropriate. This judgement is evidenced by the council:  
• making appropriate arrangement to develop medium and longer-
term financial plans and linking these to its Corporate Plan and 
priorities. 
• having effective arrangements in place for identifying risks to 
financial sustainability over the medium and longer-term, and 
understanding medium and longer-term demand pressures that 
could impact on available resources.  
• having savings plans in place to manage forecast budget deficits, 
and a reserves strategy in place to manage the use of reserves if 
the required level of savings cannot be met. 
54.  Key financial information considered in forming the judgement on the 
council’s arrangements for securing financial sustainability is outlined in 
Exhibit 10 (page 34). 
The 2025/26 budget was set with a savings target of £28.4 million 
55.  In February 2025, the council approved a revenue budget of £1,496 
million for 2025/26 (2024/25: £1,361 million). In order to balance the 
budget, the council increased council tax by 8%, raising an additional 
£29.3 million, and identified savings of £28.4 million to be made across the 
council.  
56.  In setting the budget, the council recognised there were widespread 
financial risks to delivering a balanced outturn, including: 
• An underlying pressure of £35 million (including additional National 
insurance liability) across the EIJB  
• Demand-led pressures in homelessness of £20 million, with 
assumed savings delivery of £8.2 million 
• An impact resulting from the increase in National Insurance 
contributions, estimated to be £18.9 million. 
The financial plan forecasts a budget gap of £94.2 million by 2030 
57.  The council has developed a Sustain and Reform strategy, which 
takes a whole-organisation approach to financial sustainability, and 
includes a high-level revenue budget-setting framework and medium-term 
financial plan (MTFP). Progress is reported regularly to the Finance and 
Resources Committee (F&RC). It forecasts the financial situation facing 
the council to 2029/30, sets out the financial gap and outlines scenarios 
for tackling the main financial challenges to sustainability.  
--- page 30 ---
Wider scope audit | 30 
 
58.  In June 2025, the council reported that to deliver a balanced budget in 
2025/26, it must deliver £22.8 million in budgeted savings and mitigate an 
estimated further £20.4 million in unbudgeted pressures. The projected 
budget gap for 2026/27 was £20.2 million, with a total cumulative budget 
gap of £94.2 million projected by 2029/30.  
59.  The council continues to explore savings options and has plans to 
raise additional sources of income. These plans include the decision to 
introduce a visitor levy, which is estimated could generate up to £50 million 
annually, based on a 5% rate, and the creation of a Forth Green Freeport, 
which the council could benefit from through retained NDR estimated at 
£107 million.  
60.  The council plans to apply a zero-based budgeting approach from 
2026/27. This means that every item of expenditure is determined and 
justified from ‘zero’ at the outset of the budget process – rather than rolling 
forward expected spend from the previous year. To support this change in 
approach the council is planning training for staff, developing an agreed 
prioritisation approach and undertaking cost and performance 
benchmarking. 
The city has high levels of debt which are forecast to reach £3 billion 
bringing significant financing risks 
61.  The City of Edinburgh Council has £1.773 billion worth of debt relating 
to borrowing (excluding PPP).. In recent years the council has benefited 
from a prolonged period of low interest rates and continues to be within its 
prudential indicator limits.  
62.  The council borrows from external sources to fund its capital 
programme, with 84% sourced from the UK Public Works Loans Board 
and the remainder from financial markets. The council borrowed £290 
million during the 2024/25 financial year, of which £170 million was for the 
Housing Revenue Account. 
63.  Much of the city’s capital programme is funded by borrowing. The 
council’s annual treasury management strategy 2025/26 noted that total 
capital expenditure is forecast to be £3.163 billion between 2024/25 and 
2029/30 with an underlying need to borrow at 31 March 2030 forecast to 
be £3.186 billion.  
64.  The Capital Financing Requirement (CFR) is a key metric used by the 
council and other local authorities which shows the need to borrow based 
on its capital spending plans, i.e. the amount needed over and above any 
asset sales, grants, or direct revenue funding. The treasury management 
strategy warned that the council has reached the limit in resources for 
funding its Capital Financing Requirement from temporary investment 
balances and requires to undertake significant external borrowing. Exhibit 
4 shows how the CFR is forecast to increase over the coming years to 
£3.570 billion by 2029/30. 
--- page 31 ---
Wider scope audit | 31 
 
Exhibit 7 
City of Edinburgh Council – Capital Financing Requirement forecasts 2023/24 to 2029/30 
 
 
Source: CEC Treasury Management Strategy 2025/26, March 2025 
2,000
2,200
2,400
2,600
2,800
3,000
3,200
3,400
3,600
3,800£m
Capital
Financing
Requirem
ent
--- page 32 ---
Wider scope audit | 32 
 
Exhibit 8 
City of Edinburgh Council - Ratio of Financing Costs to Net Revenue Stream  
 
Source: CEC Treasury CEC Management Strategy 2025/26, March 2025.  
Note: Figures for 2026/27 onwards are indicative as the council has not set a General Services 
or HRA budget for these years.  
65.  The indicator ‘financing costs to net revenue stream’ is used to show 
how much of council income is used to pay borrowing and debt charges. 
For councils with housing, in the case of Edinburgh, they must separately 
calculate this indicator showing how much of housing rents income will be 
required to finance housing-related borrowing and debt charges. Exhibit 6 
shows that by 2029/30 the council forecasts that 60% of housing income 
will be used to finance housing-related debt and borrowing charges. For 
general services, this is lower at 7.8%.  
66.  The Local Government Benchmarking Framework provides 
comparative data on financing ratios across Scotland’s councils. In 
2023/24, the Housing Revenue Account (HRA) financing costs ratio for 
City of Edinburgh Council was 34.2%, compared to a Scottish average of 
20%. Of Scotland's 26 councils which have an HRA and for which data is 
available, only six councils report a higher ratio, ie spend more on 
financing costs as a percentage of its income.  
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%£m
General
Services
HRA
--- page 33 ---
Wider scope audit | 33 
 
67.  Each year, the council sets an affordable borrowing limit—also known 
as the authorised limit for external debt—based on officer 
recommendations. For 2029/30, this limit is set at £3.541 billion.  
68.  In March 2025, members recognised in a motion to the full council the 
financing pressure on the HRA in particular. It requested that the strategy 
be considered as part of the zero-based budgeting process to investigate 
alternative financial strategies to reduce debt requirements to more 
sustainable levels in future and ensure a focus on improved ongoing 
services to tenants. 
69.  The council has acknowledged that such levels of borrowing will bring 
significant financing risks. Given the associated risks, it is essential that 
members fully understand the implications of the council’s external 
borrowing levels. As recommended in paragraph 47. , reporting should 
clearly outline these risks and present information in a straightforward and 
accessible manner to indicate when members need to take action. 
The council’s usable reserves have declined limiting its ability to 
respond to unforeseen issues or to invest in services 
70.  One of the key measures of the financial health of any local authority 
is the level of reserves held. The total level of usable reserves held by the 
council (Exhibit 5) reduced from £429 million in 2023/24 to £376 million in 
2024/25. Most of this has been earmarked for specific purposes and a 
residual £25.6 million is unallocated and available as revenue expenditure. 
 
Exhibit 9 
Analysis of committed and unallocated general fund balances 
 
 
Source: City of Edinburgh Council annual audited accounts 
 -
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
2019/20 2020/21 2021/22 2022/23 2023/24 2024/25
£ million
Committed Uncommitted
--- page 34 ---
Wider scope audit | 34 
 
Exhibit 10 
Key financial information  
 
 
Budget setting 
2022/23 
(£m) 
2023/24 
(£m) 
2024/25 
(£m) 
2025/26 
(£m) 
Budget gap  28.6 62.0 28.5 70.3 
Planned to be met via:      
• Savings and flexibilities 19.2 45.6 28.5 35.0 
• Use of reserves   - 6.0 
• Additional council tax / funding 9.4 16.4 - 29.3 
Actual 
Savings delivered 18.9 41.3 23.9 n/a 
Reserves  
Use of / (contribution to) reserves 29.474 36.280 44.267 n/a 
Total usable reserves carried forward  377.119 429.373 376.598  
General Fund: 266.306 353.238 301,317 n/a 
• Earmarked  240.475 327.485 275.714 n/a 
• Uncommitted  25.831 25.753 25.603 n/a 
• The council levied an additional 8% in council tax in 2025/26, which was included in the 
original budget. Note that there are differences in the way councils approach and present 
their budget and identify budget gaps. This means that direct comparison should be taken 
with caution. 
Source: The council’s 2024/25 annual accounts, Finance and Resources Committee papers 
and Local Government Overview report returns 
The IJB’s deficit will have a significant impact on council finances for 
years to come  
71.  Edinburgh IJB’s services are delivered by its two chief partners, City of 
Edinburgh Council and NHS Lothian. The partnership’s integration scheme 
‘directs’ budgets back to those partner bodies who provide the joint board’s 
services, which are mostly delivered through the Edinburgh Health and Social 
Care Partnership (EHSCP). 
72.  Taking into account changes in costs and funding estimates, the IJB 
projects a deficit of £31 million in 2025/26 rising to £87 million in 2027/28. It has 
--- page 35 ---
Wider scope audit | 35 
 
prioritised delivering efficiencies through strategic change and transformation 
measures, but warns that some proposals will have an impact on services, 
performance, citizens and staff.  
73.  The IJB reports in its strategic plan that it has never been in a stable and 
sustainable financial position since inception in 2016, with a lack of funding 
resulting in an underlying structural deficit. 
74.  An all-party motion was passed unanimously by the council in November 
2023 which sought to recalibrate the relationship between the Council and the 
IJB, including a review of the integration scheme. The motion contained a list of 
actions to be addressed, and a progress update was provided most recently in 
March 2025 to the Policy and Sustainability Committee, which detailed work 
done in response. The committee passed a further motion to request a detailed 
timeline for the expected delivery of a revised Integration Scheme. 
75.  The joint board recognises that further work is required to strengthen its 
relationship with City of Edinburgh Council. There remains tension at a 
governance level, with some elected members voicing significant concern at 
further requests to the council for additional funding. There are indications of 
improvement, and the IJB has worked more closely with senior leaders from the 
council and NHS Lothian in forming the medium-term financial strategy.  
 
  
--- page 36 ---
Wider scope audit | 36 
 
Vision, Leadership and Governance  
76.  The audit work performed on the arrangements the council has in 
place around its Vision, Leadership and Governance found that these 
were effective and appropriate. This judgement is evidenced by the 
council: 
• having a council business plan in place, supported by operational 
plans, that set out its vision, strategy, and priorities and reflect the 
pace and depth of improvement required to realise these in a 
sustainable manner.  
• having a system of financial and performance reporting in place, 
both internally and externally, that is linked to its operational plans, 
and effective scrutiny and challenge of performance provided by the 
Governance, Risk and Best Value Committee.   
77.  The council’s governance arrangements have been set out in the 
annual governance statement in the annual accounts. We have reviewed 
these arrangements and concluded that they are appropriate. Our 
observations at committee meetings have found that these are conducted 
in a professional manner and there is a reasonable level of scrutiny and 
challenge by members.  
78.  We continue to note, as we have in previous years, that some elected 
members voice concern over how scrutiny and governance is exercised at 
the council, particularly the balance of decision-making power held 
between officers and councillors. The finely-balanced political share of 
power continues to provide another challenging element to this 
environment.  
The council is changing its relationship with its arms-length bodies 
79.  The council has several arm’s-length external organisations (ALEOs) 
to provide services on its behalf, including Transport for Edinburgh Limited 
and Edinburgh Leisure. While the ALEOs are responsible for the delivery 
of some services, the council remains responsible for the public money it 
provides to the ALEOs and the quality of services the ALEOs provide. 
80.  In response to member requests, the council initiated a review of the 
governance framework for ALEOs in 2023, culminating in the presentation 
of the revised framework to the council in March 2025. This included: 
• A definition of what the council considers an ALEO, 
• A governance reporting structure for ALEOs, to support consistency 
of governance arrangements  
• Changing and developing the council observer role, and a 
• A position on Board member appointments to reduce the risk of 
elected member conflict of interests. 
--- page 37 ---
Wider scope audit | 37 
 
81.  In order to minimise this potential conflict of interest, the council 
agreed to restrict the number of elected members appointed to boards to 
no more than 33% of the total number of directors; and that they should 
not be appointed as chair of an ALEO Board.  
The council has taken some steps to improve its organisational 
culture following critical reports  
82.  The council has faced significant criticism in recent years from reports 
which have examined the impact of its organisational culture — for 
example through the Tanner Inquiry, which examined how the council 
handled serious allegations of abuse involving a senior officer, and more 
recently through the Dunion Report, which reviewed how the council 
responded to misconduct allegations against a former leader. A consistent 
theme across both inquiries—and in discussions among elected 
members—has been the need to build an open, positive, and supportive 
environment where staff feel confident raising concerns and trust that 
these will be taken seriously and acted upon. 
83.  In response, the council has made some changes to create a safe and 
supportive organisational culture. This includes improvements to its 
whistleblowing and complaints procedures, expanded training for staff, and 
strengthened policies and procedures. While these structural 
improvements are essential, they represent only one aspect of building a 
culture which actively identifies and addresses problems.  
84.  Strong leadership, both at the executive and political levels, is critical 
in building an organisation which is willing to learn from its mistakes and 
address underperformance. A clear expectation should be set that 
managers welcome early reporting of potential problems and respond to 
them swiftly. The council should actively seek to identify areas of service 
underperformance and commit to being open and transparent about where 
it needs to address failures. Concerns raised by employees, scrutiny 
bodies or the public should be taken as a chance to improve practice. 
 
  
--- page 38 ---
Wider scope audit | 38 
 
Use of Resources to Improve Outcomes  
85.  The audit work performed on the arrangements the council has in 
place around its Use of Resources to Improve Outcomes found that these 
were effective and appropriate. This judgement is evidenced by the 
council:   
• being able to demonstrate a clear link between the use of resources 
and delivery of its priorities.  
• having arrangements in place to benchmark its performance to 
identify areas of improvement.  
• being able to demonstrate improvements in performance against 
benchmarks and relative to other comparable organisations.  
86.  The council participates in the Local Government Benchmarking 
Framework (LGBF). The framework brings together a wide range of 
information about how all Scottish councils perform in delivering services, 
including the cost of services and how satisfied citizens are with them.  
87.  The most recent National Benchmarking Overview Report 2023/24 by 
the Improvement Service was published in March 2025 with the results 
considered by the council’s GRBV committee. The data provides an 
additional perspective on how the council is performing and informs the 
council’s own Planning and Performance Framework.  
88.  We expect councils to use the LGBF as part of their approach to self-
evaluation and performance reporting using the underlying principles of: 
• Transparency and clarity in the public information that shows 
delivery of local priorities and the performance of services 
• Comparison and benchmarking with councils with similar 
populations and areas (family groups) to drive improvement 
• Trends in performance over time so the direction of travel is clear. 
• Decision-making using performance data to identify improvement 
priorities, 
• Effective scrutiny by councillors of service performance, delivery of 
strategic priorities and improvement plans 
89.  The council reported, that compared to 2022/23, it had improved its 
relative position in 62 of the 96 indicators, declined in 32 and maintained 
its relative position in two of the indicators.  
90.  The council's analysis shows a mixed picture. It is in the top two 
quartiles in Scotland for 58 of the indicators, and in the bottom two for 48 
of these. Eleven indicators are in the lowest quartile, with five of these 
within environmental services. 
--- page 39 ---
Wider scope audit | 39 
 
• For primary schools measures, there was an increase in all 
children’s rates of literacy and numeracy, and a reduced attainment 
gap. 
• The street cleanliness score increased to 90.6%, placing Edinburgh  
slightly behind the Scottish average of 92.1%.  
• The proportion of adults satisfied with libraries, parks, museums 
and galleries and leisure facilities indicators are all above Scottish 
and family group averages.  
• The proportion of people earning less than the minimum wage is 
well below the Scottish and family group averages. 
• The percentage of people aged 65+ with long-term care needs who 
are receiving personal care at home has reduced year on year 
since 2021/22, from 67.9% to 55.4%. The Scotland-wide average is 
62.6%.  
• While there are improvements in housing indicators, Edinburgh 
continues to underperform across all five key measures, remaining 
below both the Scottish average and its family group benchmark. 
This includes areas such as gross rent arrears, the average time 
taken to complete non-emergency repairs, and the proportion of 
energy-efficient dwellings. Notably, the percentage of council 
homes meeting the Scottish Housing Quality Standard rose from 
40.3% to 44.6% this year. However, this still falls short of the family 
group average of 62.3% and the national average of 77.8%. 
The council’s own measures largely show improvement in key areas 
91.  The council's own Public Performance Scorecard covers core service-
level KPIs and shows how performance is progressing. Updates are 
provided on a quarterly basis and each year in the form of an annual 
performance report. The council's Public Performance Scorecard annual 
report 2024/25 was considered at the September 2025 meeting of the 
GRBV Committee. Of the council's own 78 indicators, 6 were flagged as 
red (behind target), while 28 were marked as green (on or ahead of 
target).  
92.  As with the LGBF indicators, a mixed picture of progress across the 
council was presented, with indicators showing improvement in adult 
social care measures, children, families and communities, customer 
contact, planning and building standards and roads.  
93.  Areas with concern included homelessness, and an increase in the 
number of anti-social behaviour complaints. The Local Environmental 
Audit and Management System score (LEAMS) assesses street 
cleanliness and local environmental quality. Edinburgh reports that its 
score decreased slightly to 89% in 2024/25 after some years of 
improvement. The Scotland average is 91.7%, and compares favourably 
--- page 40 ---
Wider scope audit | 40 
 
to Dundee (83.2%), Glasgow (86.3%) and is similar to Aberdeen (89.3%). 
Domestic kerbside missed bin service requests rose in 2024/25 to more 
than 30,000 and is behind the target of 21,516.  
94.  Members also consider progress against council's business plan 
through an annual update report. It provides an update on the council's 
three core strategic priorities, and progress with actions under the ten 
designated outcomes.  